---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Conan 1.21: Faster parallel uploads, Intel compiler support, improved Python requires and
matching names in generators for the upstream package!"
---

We are saying goodbye to 2019 with 1.21 release that comes with lots of cool features, bugfixes, and
contributions from the community. Let's see some of those.

## Use multiple threads for uploading Conan packages to remotes

After many users requested this feature, we have been preparing it since Conan 1.19. First, [we moved
to a progress bar system](https://github.com/conan-io/conan/pull/5407) that supports concurrency.
After that, we did a [whole refactor](https://github.com/conan-io/conan/pull/5763) of the
console output. Now, since Conan 1.21, it will be possible to upload Conan packages to
remotes faster thanks to the use of multiple threads. To activate this feature you just have to add
the `--parallel` argument to the `conan upload` command:

```
$ conan upload "*" --confirm --parallel --all -r my_remote
```

There are two levels of parallelization. First, all of the references are uploaded in parallel. Then,
for each of those references, all of its binary packages are uploaded in parallel too. The maximum
level of total simultaneous threads used for uploading is 8. Depending on the configuration and the
number of uploaded packages, an **increase in speed for around 400%** can be achieved.

## Intel compiler support

Now Conan supports the Intel compiler. This compiler has the peculiarity of using `Visual Studio`
in Windows and `gcc` in Linux as base compilers. This is how the new entry looks in the *settings.yml*:

```yml
intel:
    version: ["11", "12", "13", "14", "15", "16", "17", "18", "19"]
    base:
        gcc:
            <<: *gcc
            threads: [None]
            exception: [None]
        Visual Studio:
            <<: *visual_studio
```

To manage the compatibility between the
packages generated with `intel` and the generated with the base compiler you can use the
[compatible_packages](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/creating_packages/define_abi_compatibility.html?#compatible-compilers)
feature that provides `base_compatible()` and `parent_compatible(compiler="compiler",
version="version")` functions to define compatibility between packages.

For example, defining a `package_id` this way:

```python
def package_id(self):

    if self.settings.compiler == "intel":
        p = self.info.clone()
        p.base_compatible()
        self.compatible_packages.append(p)
```

Would make Conan resolve the `Visual Studio` or `gcc` package in case there is no package
generated by the `intel` compiler.

The opposite would also be possible using the
[parent_compatible](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/creating_packages/define_abi_compatibility.html?#compatible-compilers)
function to fall back to Intel packages in case the `Visual Studio` one is not present:

```python
def package_id(self):

   if self.settings.compiler == "Visual Studio":
      compatible_pkg = self.info.clone()
      compatible_pkg.parent_compatible(compiler="intel", version=16)
      self.compatible_packages.append(compatible_pkg)
```

## Improved Python requires

In the 1.7 release, we introduced the Python requires feature to share Python code between different recipes.
For this release, we have a new improved `python_requires` that solves some drawbacks from the old one.
These are the main features of the new implementation:

 * **Class attribute**. The syntax declares a class attribute instead of a module function call so
   that recipes are cleaner.

 * **PackageID modification**. Now `python_requires` will affect the consumers package_id.

As we said, now the syntax is easier and more aligned with the rest of the recipe syntax. With the
previous version if you wanted to reuse methods from a base class you had to do something like this:

```python
from conans import ConanFile, python_requires

base = python_requires("pyreq/version")

class ConsumerConan(base.get_conanfile()):
    name = "consumer"
    version = base.get_version()
```

And with the new syntax it looks like this:

```python
from conans import ConanFile

class Pkg(ConanFile):
    python_requires = "pyreq/0.1"
    python_requires_extend = "pyreq.MyBase"
```

The version of the `python_requires` will now affect the package ID of the packages that use them with
a `minor_mode` policy. That means that if you change the minor or major components of the version, it
will generate a new package ID but the patch component will not affect the ID. Learn more about the
new implementation [in the Conan
documentation](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/extending/python_requires.html#python-requires).


## Use different names by generator

As you probably know, the `cpp_info` attribute from the conanfile stores all the information
needed by consumers of a package like include directories or library names and paths. Since 1.19, we
introduced a new attribute for this object called name so if you set `cpp_info.name`, that name should
be used by some supported generators to create file or variable names instead of using the regular
package name.

Now, in the 1.21 release, [we extend this
feature](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/conanfile/attributes.html?#cpp-info)
by using `cpp_info.names["generator_name"]` so you can specify this same name per generator.
If you want to use `CMake` and `pkg_config` generators for the same recipe different names can be set
for each of those.

Let's see an example where you have a conanfile.py with this `package_info` for the package `Mylib/0.1`:

```python
    def package_info(self):
        self.cpp_info.names["cmake"] = "MyLib"
        self.cpp_info.names["pkg_config"] = "my_lib"
```

If this package is installed using the `CMake` generator a target with the name `CONAN_PKG::MyLib`
will be created. If you install the package using the `pkg_config` generator a file `my_lib.pc` will
be generated with a library name `my_lib` inside.

## Other cool things

 * Set the [logging
   level](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/env_vars.html?#conan-logging-level)
   to Conan using a name instead of a number, which is much more intuitive. The available logging
   levels are: `critical`, `error`, `warning`, `info` and `debug`.
 * Use
   [`tools.check_min_cppstd()`](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/tools.html?#tools-check-min-cppstd)
   and
   [`tools.valid_min_cppstd()`](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/tools.html?#tools-valid-min-cppstd)
   to check if the cppstd version is valid for a specific package.
 * Use [`fuzz`](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/tools.html?#tools-patch)
   parameter in `tools.patch()` function to accept fuzzy patches.

<br>

-----------

<br>

Have a look at the full list of features and fixes in the
[changelog](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/changelog.html).

Report any bug or share your feedback opening a new issue in our [issue
tracker](https://github.com/conan-io/conan/issues), don't forget to
[update](https://conan.io/downloads.html) and **merry Christmas!**
