---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Conan 1.30: improved libcxx detection for gcc, experimental tools for
intel compiler support, experimental MSBuildToolchain, self.cpp_info.requires
attribute, macOS 11 support"
---

Conan 1.30 has been released. This release moves forward on several integrations
including GCC, Intel compiler, and MSBuild. It brings some more maturity around
components, and adds a new way to use custom generators. Also, macOS 11 (aka
"Big Sur") has now been added to Conan's default settings.

## Improved libcxx detection for GCC

When Conan is installed, it autodetects a number of settings based on the
environment. Among those settings are `compiler` and `compiler.version`. When
the `compiler` is `gcc`, it also detects `compiler.libcxx` which has had some
challenging corner cases for a while. This release adds robustness to the
`libcxx` detection which hopefully will result in better defaults for those
corner cases when Conan is installed.

**Note:** If we enabled this behavior by default, it could be considered a breaking
change, so we had to leave it off by default and users must set the
`CONAN_V2_MODE` [environment
variable](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/conan_v2_mode.html#conan-v2-mode)
to turn it on.

## Experimental tools for intel compiler support

Conan's [tools](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/tools.html) module
provides `conanfile.py` authors with a number of helper functions to
reduce boilerplate code in recipes and avoid common errors. Three new functions
have now been exposed for when recipes need special handling to work with the
Intel compiler:

- `tools.intel_installation_path()`
- `tools.intel_compilervars()`
- `tools.intel_compilervars_dict()`

## Experimental Toolchain for MSBuild

Continuing our work on Conan's new toolchain strategy, this release contains a
toolchain class for the `MSBuild` build system. Like the existing `CMake` and
`Make` toolchains which have been added previously, this new toolchain class
generates `.props` files which contain all the relevant build-related variables
from Conan. These `.props` files do NOT include variables related to
dependencies. Dependency-related information should still be generated by the
`msbuild` generator.

## New self.cpp_info.requires attribute

We have also continued to evolve and improve the experience around the
components feature. A common case that has come up is that many packages which
declare components are depended upon by downstream packages which do not declare
components. Previously, when the downstream package only depends upon specific
components of the upstream package, it could not model that in it's own
`cpp_info`. This meant that all transitive consumers would end up depending on
all components of the original upstream.

This is a tricky problem to describe without an example, so here is the example
of the `package_info` method from the OpenSSL recipe, and one from a consumer of
OpenSSL.

```python
# Conanfile for OpenSSL:

def package_info(self):
    self.cpp_info.name = "OpenSSL"
    self.cpp_info.components["crypto"].names["cmake_find_package"] = "Crypto"
    self.cpp_info.components["crypto"].libs = ["libcrypto"]
    self.cpp_info.components["crypto"].defines = ["DEFINE_CRYPTO=1"]
    self.cpp_info.components["crypto"].requires = ["zlib::zlib"]

    self.cpp_info.components["ssl"].names["cmake"] = "SSL"
    self.cpp_info.components["ssl"].includedirs = ["include/headers_ssl"]
    self.cpp_info.components["ssl"].libs = ["libssl"]
```

```python
# Conanfile for consumer of OpenSSL:

def package_info(self):
    self.cpp_info.requires = ['openssl::ssl']
    # Depends only on ssl component
    # Which notably does NOT depend on zlib
    # ...
```

OpenSSL declares two components: `ssl` and `crypto`. The consumer package only
needs one of them (`ssl`). With the new `cpp_info.requires` attribute, the
consumer can properly declare that dependency. The result is that this consumer,
and all future downstream consumers of it will only link with the `ssl`
component of the OpenSSL package and not `libcrypto` nor `zlib`.

## Other notable changes

The Qbs generator received a significant update which makes it properly model
transitive dependencies using the native dependency declaration syntax. This
cuts down on clutter and should enforce linker order properly. The `JSON` and
`Markdown` generators both learned how to include the `cpp_info.names` and
`cpp_info.filenames` attributes.

-----------
<br>

Besides the items listed above, there were some minor bug fixes you may wish to
read about.  If so, please refer to the
[changelog](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/changelog.html#oct-2020) for the
complete list.

We hope you enjoy this release, and look forward to [your
feedback](https://github.com/conan-io/conan/issues). 
